Node.js+npm dependency resolution description (#30)
chains-project/chains-project.github.io: dependency-resolution/index.md

Hence, `Dx` which has the highest `semver` version is selected and that is `Dx v1.5.0`.

By following this algorithm, the build list is guaranteed to include the oldest module versions available that meet the requirements, thus achieving reproducible behavior.

## Node.js + npm

[npm](https://docs.npmjs.com/about-npm) is a package manager for [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en), it facilitates the installation of dependencies for use by Node.js.
To understand what dependency is used at runtime we need to understand both npm and Node.js work.

As a runtime for an interpreted language, Node.js resolves dependencies at runtime.

> To do this it starts to look for a folder structure matching the dependency name inside a `node_modules/` directory in the directory of the file importing the dependency.

Reviewer: Do you mean it recursively goes up the filesystem tree to look for `node_modules` and then searching inside it for dependency tree?

Reviewer: If yes, a `tree`-like output would be very nice to explain it.

Author: > Do you mean it recursively goes up the filesystem tree to look for node_modules and then searching inside it for dependency tree?
>
> If yes, a tree-like output would be very nice to explain it.

Yes, tried to clarify this a bit more and added an example. Let me know if you have further suggestions.

Reviewer: It is clear now. Thanks!

> If it is not found it will repeat this process in the parent folder. This is repeated until, depending on the configuration, some kind of root directory is reached.

Reviewer: > some kind of root directory is reached.

Can we be specific about how the root directory is determined?

Author: Updated.

I misremembered and double checked and it seems to always go to the file system root if necessary.

Importantly, this is also how transitive dependencies are resolved.

As a package manager for Node.js, npm installs dependencies by downloading them from the internet (a package registry or source repository) and putting them in the `node_modules/` directory.
For re-used dependencies two things may happen.

> If a common version is supported by multiple dependencies, npm will try to put the common version directly in the `node_modules/` directory of the parent project, where it can be shared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a common version is supported by multiple dependencies, npm will try to put the common version directly in the `node_modules/` directory of the common parent project of those dependencies, where it can be shared.
```

Author: If I'm reading your suggestion correctly it seems you're assuming multiple workspaces? I'd like to keep the description here to projects without workspaces because it's simpler and, I think, naturally extends to workspaces anyway.

Reviewer: > you're assuming multiple workspaces

I did not know they were called multiple workspaces. But I agree,we can stick to projects that are not workspaces.

> If a transitive version of a dependency is not supported by other dependencies, it will instead by installed in the `node_modules/` directory of its parent dependency, where it cannot be shared.

Reviewer: >  not supported

Do you mean the version regex does not match? For example `^`, `~` etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a transitive version of a dependency is not supported by other dependencies, it will instead by installed in the `node_modules/` directory of the dependency that needs it.
The other dependencies will not be able to access the transitive version.
```

Author: > Do you mean the version regex does not match? For example `^`, `~` etc.

Not sure what you mean by regex here (those symbols aren't regular expression). Tried to clarify by explicitly mentioning npm uses [SemVer](https://semver.org/).

Reviewer: > those symbols aren't regular expression

Oh right. I did not know what they are called so I just said regex.

npm's dependency version resolution algorithm is roughly as follows. When installing a new dependency npm will try to use the latest available version of each dependency such that it can be reused the most. This may result in downgrading of previously installed dependencies or installing dependencies multiple times if no common version is available (e.g. two different major versions).
Further control over the resolution is possible through commands such as `npm upgrade` and `npm dedupe` which can upgrade dependencies on a specific path and try to reduce unnecessary dependency duplication respectively.

> Consider the above dependency graph as an example. If the version constraint of `Dx` for all parent dependencies is something like `^1.0.0` (i.e. any version at or above 1.0.0 but below 2.0.0) it will be installed only once, say as `1.6.0`, at `node_modules/Dx`. If instead `D11` depends on exactly `1.0.0` and all others depend on `^1.0.0` it will still be installed only once at `node_modules/Dx` but as `1.0.0`. If instead `D11` depends on exactly `1.0.0` and all other depends on `^1.2.0`, `Dx` will be installed twice: once as `1.6.0` at `node_modules/Dx` and once as `1.0.0` at `node_modules/D11/node_modules/Dx`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider the above dependency graph as an example.
If the version constraint of `Dx`, as defined in all of its parent project is `^1.0.0` (i.e. any version at or above 1.0.0 but below 2.0.0), `v1.5.0` will be installed as it is the latest version of that dependency at `root_project/node_modules/Dx`.
If instead `D11` depends on exactly `1.0.0` and all others dependencies depend on `^1.0.0`, `v1.0.0` will be installed only once at `root_project/node_modules/Dx`.
Finally, if `D11` depends on exactly `1.0.0` and all other depends on `^1.2.0`, `Dx` will be installed twice: once as `1.5.0` at `root_project/node_modules/Dx` and once as `1.0.0` at `root_project/node_modules/D1/node_modules/D11/node_modules/Dx`.
```

Reviewer: Can you also write about version resolution in case of `~1.0.0`?

If it is not found it will repeat this process in the parent folder. This is repeated recursively until the root directory is reached ([ref](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest-v20.x/api/modules.html#loading-from-node_modules-folders)).
Importantly, this is also how transitive dependencies are resolved.

This means that for a file at `/home/example/projects/file.js` on a Unix-like system it will look for the dependency in order, returning the first instance it finds, in the following places:

```text
/home/example/projects/node_modules/
/home/example/node_modules/
/home/node_modules/
/node_modules/
```

And, if the [`--no-global-search-paths`](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest-v20.x/api/cli.html#--no-global-search-paths) option isn't used, it would also look in the following places:

```text
$NODE_PATH/node_modules
$HOME/.node_modules
```

As a package manager for Node.js, npm installs dependencies by downloading them from the internet (a package registry or source repository) and putting them in the `node_modules/` directory.
For re-used dependencies two things may happen.

> If a common version is supported by multiple dependencies, npm will try to put the common version directly in the `node_modules/` directory of the parent project, where it can be shared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a common version is supported by multiple dependencies, npm will try to put the common version directly in the `node_modules/` directory of the root project, where it can be shared.
```

I think this is clearer in that case.
